doc: add notes and questions for 28368 (#725)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2023-11-01-#28368.md

* Similarly, whenever a new block is connected, the [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487) method removes the block transactions that are in the mempool together with its ancestors. This also triggers an update to the fee estimator synchronously.
 
* Since `processBlock` happens within [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487), these fee estimator update blocks [`ConnectTip`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validation.h#L732C13-L732C13). Adding more steps to the fee estimator during this update can slow down block processing even further.

> * The [`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L77) is a class any subscriber can implement to register for events and receive notifications when the events are fired.

Reviewer: Hm I think there is some conflation between registering with `CMainSignals` and implementing a method of `CValidationInterface`. I'd probably describe it as:

Subclasses of `CValidationInterface` implement its methods to specify what should be done in response to the corresponding event, and register these callbacks with `CMainSignals`. Validation and mempool use `CMainSignals` to "notify" subscribers of these events. The "notification" may entail executing a callback immediately or adding it to a queue of callbacks to be executed in the background. These classes can be called clients or subscribers of the `CValidationInterface`.

Author: Thanks, I have updated it to.
Subclasses of [CValidationInterface](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L77) can implement its methods, and specify the instructions to be executed in response to the corresponding event. and register the subclass with [CMainSignals](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) using [RegisterValidationInterface](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L26). Validation and mempool use [CMainSignals](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) to "notify" subscribers of these events. The "notification" may entail executing a callback immediately or adding it to a queue of callbacks to be executed in the background.

   * `CValidationInterface` has notifications for major events that are happening in the node, when a transaction is added to the mempool [`TransactionAddedToMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L99), when a transaction is removed from the mempool [`TransactionRemovedFromMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L133), when a new block is connected to the chain [`BlockConnected`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L140) and others.

    * These events are executed asynchronously on a different thread from the one that fired the event.

* This PR removes the [`CTxMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/22fa1f4702e9a60e141f545f8d09704deca34b22/src/txmempool.h#L301) dependency on the [`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/policy/fees.h#L146C13-L146C13) by implementing the `CValidationInterface` and subscribing to events relevant to the fee estimator.

> * The `CBlockPolicyEstimator` now updates asynchronously in the background by depending on notifications from `CValidationInterface`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `CBlockPolicyEstimator` now updates asynchronously in response to `CValidationInterface` events.
```

> * The PR added another `CValidationInterface` notification `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` which is fired in [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The PR added another `CValidationInterface` event `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` which is fired in [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487).
```

4. The first attempt [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775) split the `CValidationInterface` into `CValidationInterface` and `MempoolInterface`. What is the distinction between the two interfaces?
5. Is the split necessary to achieve a background fee estimator? Is it crucial in the long run?
6. Why does this approach omit the split?
7. Can you list the other subscribers to the interface? (Hint: look for classes that inherit from `CValidationInterface`)
8. What does it mean for a class to implement one of the `CValidationInterface` methods? Why is it similar to "subscribing to the event"?
9. What is the difference between implementing a `BlockConnected` and a `NewPoWValidBlock` callback, apart from the fact that they are different events? On which thread is each callback executed?
### Code Review

{:start="10"}

10. In [`4986edb`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4986edb99f8aa73f72e87f3bdc09387c3e516197), Why are we adding a new notification `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForBlock` why can't we use `BlockConnected`?

> 11. In [1d116df](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/1d116df4c0e021c4c810450e3e5358f34d72940b) a new struct `NewMempoolTransactionInfo` is defined in `kernel/mempool_entry.h` Is that the right place for the struct? What can be a better name for the struct?

Author: Updated and other places.
Thanks

* Before this PR [`CTxMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/22fa1f4702e9a60e141f545f8d09704deca34b22/src/txmempool.h#L301) owns a [`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/policy/fees.h#L146C13-L146C13) as one of its members and, whenever a transaction is added or removed from the mempool in [`addUnchecked`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L475), [`removedUnchecked`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L787) and  [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487) methods, it also updates the fee estimator synchronously.
 

> * `removeForBlock` calls the fee estimator [`processBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/106ab20f121f14d021725c8a657999079dbabfc1/src/policy/fees.h#L204C11-L204C11) to update the fee stats when transactions are removed from the mempool after a new block connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `removeForBlock` calls [`CBlockPolicyEstimator::processBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/106ab20f121f14d021725c8a657999079dbabfc1/src/policy/fees.h#L204C11-L204C11) to update the fee stats when transactions are removed from the mempool after a new block connection.
```

> * This `removeForBlock` fee estimator updates block [`ConnectTip`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validation.h#L732C13-L732C13). Adding more steps to `processBlock` can slow down block processing even further.

Reviewer: Took me a few tries to parse this since "updates" is the noun and "block" is the verb. Maybe some extra words could help:
```suggestion
* Since `removeForBlock` is part of a series of function calls within [`ConnectTip`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validation.h#L732C13-L732C13), block processing is blocked by fee estimator updates. Adding more steps to `CBlockPolicyEstimator::processBlock` can slow down block processing even further.
```

* Subclasses of [`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L77) are called subscribers or clients of `CValidationInterface`. They can implement the callbacks they need and must register with [`CMainSignals`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) using [`RegisterValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L26).

> Validation and mempool use [`CMainSignals`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) to "notify" subscribers of these callbacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validation and mempool use [`CMainSignals`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) to "notify" subscribers of these events.
```

> The "notification" may entail executing a callback immediately or adding it to a queue of callbacks to be executed in the background. 
> 
>   * These callbacks are executed asynchronously on a different thread from the one that fired the event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the event, the callbacks may be executed immediately or added to a queue of callbacks to be executed asynchronously on a different thread.
```

>   * `CValidationInterface` has notifications for major events that are happening in the node, when a transaction is added to the mempool [`TransactionAddedToMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L99), when a transaction is removed from the mempool [`TransactionRemovedFromMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L133), when a new block is connected to the chain [`BlockConnected`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L140) and others.

Reviewer: Also maybe this point should come before the other ones about `CValidationInterface`?
```suggestion
  * `CValidationInterface` includes validation-related events such as addition of a transaction to the mempool [`TransactionAddedToMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L99), a removal of a transaction from the mempool [`TransactionRemovedFromMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L133), connection of a block to the chain [`BlockConnected`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L140), and others.
```

* This PR removes `CTxMempool` dependency on `CBlockPolicyEstimator` by making `CBlockPolicyEstimator` a client of `CValidationInterface`, instead of an internal component of `CTxMemPool`.

  * The `CBlockPolicyEstimator` now updates asynchronously in response to `CValidationInterface` callback notifications.

>   * The PR added another `CValidationInterface` callback `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` which is fired in [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487).

Reviewer: Please stick with using present tense
```suggestion
  * The PR adds a new `CValidationInterface` callback `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` which is fired in [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487).
```

## Questions

### Conceptual
1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

2. Why is it beneficial to remove `CTxMempool` dependency on `CBlockPolicyEstimator`?

3. Are there any benefits of the `CBlockPolicyEstimator` being a member of `CTxMempool`? Are there downsides to removing it?

4. The first attempt [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775) split the `CValidationInterface` into `CValidationInterface` and `MempoolInterface`. What is the distinction between the two interfaces?

5. What do you think is better or worse about the approach taken in this approach, versus the one taken in [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775) split the `CValidationInterface`?

6. Can you list the other subscribers to `CValidationInterface`?

7. Why is implementing a `CValidationInterface` method equivalent to "subscribing to the event"?

8. `BlockConnected` and `NewPoWValidBlock` are different callbacks. Are they both asynchronous?

### Code Review

> {:start="10"}

Reviewer: you skipped number 9 (did 7 eat it?)
```suggestion
{:start="9"}
```

9. In [`4986edb`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4986edb99f8aa73f72e87f3bdc09387c3e516197), why are we adding a new callback `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` instead of using `BlockConnected`?

> 10. In [`1d116df`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/1d116df4c0e021c4c810450e3e5358f34d72940b), is `kernel/mempool_entry.h` the right place for `NewMempoolTransactionInfo`? What can be a better name for the struct?

Reviewer: I don't think we'll learn very much from discussing what to name it, maybe talk about its members instead?
```suggestion
10. In [`1d116df`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/1d116df4c0e021c4c810450e3e5358f34d72940b), is `kernel/mempool_entry.h` the right place for `NewMempoolTransactionInfo`? What members are included in this struct, and why are they necessary?
```

11. Why can't we use `vector<CTxMempoolEntry>` as the first parameter of `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForBlock` callback?

12. How can you get the base fee of a `CTransactionRef`?

13. In [`ab4e250`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/ab4e250d1d209e0c79dba266461e6b0cfd670452#diff-c065d4cd2398ad0dbcef393c5dfc53f465bf44723348892395fffd2fb3bac522), is moving `removeTx` call to reason != `BLOCK` scope necessary? Is it fixing a bug?

14. Why is the fee estimator not tracking transactions with unconfirmed parents?

15. In [`79bcc5c`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13/src/txmempool.cpp#L641), we pass a copy of transaction `parents`, `nSizeWithAncestors`, and `nModFeesWithAncestors` to `NewMempoolTransactionInfo` is there a better approach to get all that information?

> 16. In [`79bcc5c`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13): why are the block transactions and their ancestors not removed from the mempool in the [first loop](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13/src/txmempool.cpp#L635) in `removeForBlock`?

Reviewer: Please use consistent punctuation
```suggestion
16. In [`79bcc5c`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13), why are the block transactions and their ancestors not removed from the mempool in the [first loop](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13/src/txmempool.cpp#L635) in `removeForBlock`?
```

* Before this PR [`CTxMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/22fa1f4702e9a60e141f545f8d09704deca34b22/src/txmempool.h#L301) owns a [`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/policy/fees.h#L146C13-L146C13) as one of its members and, whenever a transaction is added or removed from the mempool in [`addUnchecked`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L475) and [`removedUnchecked`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L787) methods, it also updates the fee estimator synchronously.

> * Similarly, whenever a new block is connected, the [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487) method removes the block transactions that are in the mempool together with its ancestors. This also triggers an update to the fee estimator synchronously.

Author: I rephrase the point, thanks

 
* Since `processBlock` happens within [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487), these fee estimator updates blocks [`ConnectTip`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validation.h#L732C13-L732C13). Adding more steps to the fee estimator during this update can slow down block processing even further.

> * Subclasses of [`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L77) can implement its methods, and specify  the instructions to be executed in response to the corresponding event. 
> and register the subclass with [`CMainSignals`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) using [`RegisterValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L26).

Reviewer 2: "and specify  the instructions to be executed in response to the corresponding event." So... implement the callback? Making phrasing as concise as possible is always better, think you can just leave that out?

```suggestion
* Subclasses of [`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L77) are called subscribers or clients. They can implement the callbacks they need, and must register with [`CMainSignals`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) using [`RegisterValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L26).
```

Validation and mempool use [`CMainSignals`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L182C7-L182C19) to "notify" subscribers of these events. 
The "notification" may entail executing a callback immediately or adding it to a queue of callbacks to be executed in the background. 
* These Subclasses can be called clients or subscribers of the [`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L77).

>     * These events are executed asynchronously on a different thread from the one that fired the event.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean callback or event? Also, just a few lines up you mention that "The "notification" may entail executing a callback immediately or adding it to a queue of callbacks to be executed in the background. ", that seems contradictory?

>    * [`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/9c30f5ef9d6712539cb8dc0f52b3a2206a25e074/src/validationinterface.h#L77) has notifications for major events that are happening in the node, when a transaction is added to the mempool [`TransactionAddedToMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L99), when a transaction is removed from the mempool [`TransactionRemovedFromMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L133), when a new block is connected to the chain [`BlockConnected`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L140) and others.

Author: Done

## Questions

### Conceptual
1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

2. Why is it beneficial to remove `CTxMempool` dependency on `CBlockPolicyEstimator`?

3. Are there any benefits of the `CBlockPolicyEstimator` being a member of `CBlockPolicyEstimator` Are there downsides to removing it?

4. The first attempt [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775) split the `CValidationInterface` into `CValidationInterface` and `MempoolInterface`. What is the distinction between the two interfaces?

> 5. Is the split necessary to achieve a background fee estimator? Is it crucial in the long run?

Author: Rephrased, and made it more explicit

6. Why does this approach omit the split?

7. Can you list the other subscribers to the interface? (Hint: look for classes that inherit from `CValidationInterface`)

8. What does it mean for a class to implement one of the `CValidationInterface` methods? Why is it similar to "subscribing to the event"?

> 9. What is the difference between implementing a `BlockConnected` and a `NewPoWValidBlock` callback, apart from the fact that they are different events? On which thread is each callback executed?

Reviewer 2: I think you're trying to ask about (a)synchronousness? I would phrase it in specifically that way. The difference between implementing a `BlockConnected` and a `NewPoWValidBlock` callback is very broad.

Author: Updated, thank you

### Code Review

{:start="10"}

> 10. In [`4986edb`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4986edb99f8aa73f72e87f3bdc09387c3e516197), Why are we adding a new notification `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForBlock` why can't we use `BlockConnected`?

Author: Rephrased to 

In [`4986edb`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/4986edb99f8aa73f72e87f3bdc09387c3e516197), why are we adding a new callback `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` instead of using `BlockConnected`?
```

see https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/website/pull/725#discussion_r1365645253

11. In [`1d116df`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/1d116df4c0e021c4c810450e3e5358f34d72940b) a new struct `NewMempoolTransactionInfo` is defined in `kernel/mempool_entry.h` Is that the right place for the struct? What can be a better name for the struct?

> 12. Are there reasons why the `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForBlock` first parameter is not  `vector<CTxMempoolEntry>`?

Author: Done

> 13. Are there other alternatives to get the base fee of `CTransactionRef`? Why can't we use it instead of making copies of the base fee in `NewMempoolTransactionInfo`?

Reviewer 2: Alternatives to what?

What's "it" int "Why can't we use it"?

Author: updated to a clear question

14. In [`ab4e250`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/ab4e250d1d209e0c79dba266461e6b0cfd670452#diff-c065d4cd2398ad0dbcef393c5dfc53f465bf44723348892395fffd2fb3bac522), why is `removeTx` call moved to to reason != `BLOCK` scope? Is it necessary? Is it fixing a bug?

> 15. Why is the fee estimator not tracking transactions with in-mempool parents?

Reviewer 2: Is it not tracking transactions that have in-mempool parents, or is it not tracking those in-mempool parents?

Author: Thanks here I used `CTxMempool` variable name for the question, this might be confusing.
updated to 

Why is the fee estimator not tracking transactions with unconfirmed parents?

> 16. In [`79bcc5c`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13) we pass a copy of transaction `parents`, `nSizeWithAncestors`, and `nModFeesWithAncestors` to `NewMempoolTransactionInfo` Why is that necessary? Is there a better approach to achieving the desired goal?

Reviewer 2: Can you provide a more precise link please? It's quite a large commit.

> 17. In [`79bcc5c`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13) `removeForBlock` why are the block transactions and their ancestors not removed from the mempool in the [first loop](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13/src/txmempool.cpp#L635)?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
17. In [`79bcc5c`](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13): why are the block transactions and their ancestors not removed from the mempool in the [first loop](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13/src/txmempool.cpp#L635) in `removeForBlock`?
```

components: ["tx fees and policy"]
host: ismaelsadeeq
status: upcoming
commit: 79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13
---

## Notes

* In this week's review club, we will discuss bitcoin core PR #28368 which modifies the fee estimator `CBlockPolicyEstimator` to update from the `CValidationInterface` / `CScheduler` thread notifications instead of mempool.

> 

Author: Removed 👍🏾

* The [`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/policy/fees.h#L146C13-L146C13) is used to estimate fees based on a confirmation target. We have two RPCs, [`estimaterawfees`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/rpc/fees.cpp#L100) and [`estimatesmartfees`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/rpc/fees.cpp#L29) used to obtain a fee estimate for a given confirmation target, it is also heavily used in the [wallet](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/wallet/fees.cpp#L29).

> * Before this PR the [`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/policy/fees.h#L146C13-L146C13) is coupled to the mempool such that whenever a transaction is added or removed from the mempool in [`addUnchecked`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L475) and [`removedUnchecked`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L787) methods we also update the fee estimator.

Author: I rephrase it to your suggestion, thank you

* Similarly, whenever a new block is connected, the mempool in the [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487) method removes the block transactions that are in the mempool together with its ancestors, this also triggers an update to the fee estimator.
 

> * This update is slowing down [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487) because the mempool [`cs`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L391C1-L391C1) is held and waits for the fee estimator to finish updating before getting out of the [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487) scope, hence blocking [`ConnectTip`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validation.h#L732C13-L732C13), adding complex steps to the fee estimator during this update can be inefficient.

Author: Thanks fixed

> * The [`CValidationInterface`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L77) is a class any subscriber can implement to receive event callbacks whenever they are generated.

Reviewer: I wouldn't really say callbacks are "received" or "emitted". I'd maybe say that validation "fires signals" or "emits events" and a client that *registered* a callback "receives a notification." A thread *executes* a callback.

Do you want to mention that some of these callbacks are run *asynchronously* on a different thread from the one that fires the event? That's the key benefit of this PR. A few other notes might help as well, as I think it's probably the biggest concept for new reviewers to learn for this PR.

Author: Reword it to your suggestion, and explicitly state that the fee estimator now updates asynchronously in the background

   * The callbacks will be received by the subscriber in the order in which they are generated by validation and mempool.

* This PR decouples the fee estimator from the mempool by implementing the `CValidationInterface` and subscribing to events relevant to the fee estimator.

* The PR added another `CValidationInterface` callback`MempoolTransactionsRemovedForConnectedBlock` which is emitted in  [`removeForBlock`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/txmempool.h#L487).

> * The PR also modifies the [`TransactionAddedToMempool`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/validationinterface.h#L99) callback parameter from `CTransactionRef` to a new struct which has the [`CTransactionRef`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/ab2f531b785c3c17746ac9766a6db5b6d26677e8/src/primitives/transaction.h#L421) and other information the fee estimator needs such as the size, fees, and others. There has been an attempt at this PR [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775)

Reviewer: I think `s/callback/events/g` here

## Questions

### Conceptual
1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?
2. Why is it beneficial to decouple the fee estimator from the mempool?

> 3.  Are there any benefits of the fee estimator coupled to the mempool? Are there downsides to decoupling it?

Reviewer: Maybe add a few questions about the `CValidationInterface` as it could be something people struggle with. e.g.

- Can you list the other subscribers to the interface? (Hint: look for classes that inherit from `CValidationInterface`)
- What does it mean for a class to implement one of the `CValidationInterface` methods? Why is it similar to "subscribing to the event?"
- What is the difference between implementing a `BlockConnected` and a `NewPoWValidBlock` callback, apart from the fact that they are different events? On which thread is each callback executed?

Author: I added the questions, thanks for ideas.

4. The first attempt [#11775](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/11775) split the `CValidationInterface` into `CValidationInterface` and `MempoolInterface`. What is the distinction between the two interfaces?
5. Is the split necessary to achieve a background fee estimator? Is it crucial in the long run?

6. Why does this approach omit the split?

### Code Review

> 

Author: Thank you I've added it.

9. Are there reasons why the `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForBlock` first parameter is not`vector<CTxMempoolEntry>`?

10. Are there other alternatives to get the base fee of `CTransactionRef`? Why can't we use it instead of making copies of the base fee in `NewMempoolTransactionInfo`?

11. In [fc96ae83220a24378f2dd6d89392c45a0fada4e9](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28368/commits/ab4e250d1d209e0c79dba266461e6b0cfd670452#diff-c065d4cd2398ad0dbcef393c5dfc53f465bf44723348892395fffd2fb3bac522), why is `remoteTx` call moved to to reason != `BLOCK` scope? Was that a bug previously? If yes, why was it unnoticed?

12. Why is the fee estimator not tracking transactions with in-mempool parents?

13. In [272bf55e8e02ba32919f44cb1faff98a71c5843e](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28368/commits/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13) we pass a copy of transaction `parents`, `nSizeWithAncestors`, and `nModFeesWithAncestors` to `NewMempoolTransactionInfo` Why is that necessary? Is there a better approach to achieving the desired goal?

> 14. In [272bf55e8e02ba32919f44cb1faff98a71c5843e](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28368/commits/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13) `removeForBlock` why are the block transactions and its ancestors removed from the mempool in the [first loop](https://github.com/ismaelsadeeq/bitcoin/blob/79bcc5ca0679daf6e57fc4d7ce2244262a7cfd13/src/txmempool.cpp#L635)? 

Author: Added
